demo/documented/hyperelasticity/cpp/main.cpp.rst, before:

Hyperelasticity (C++)
=====================

The implementation is split in two files: a form file containing the
definition of the variational forms expressed in UFL and the solver
which is implemented in a C++ file.

Running this demo requires the files: :download:`main.cpp`,
:download:`HyperElasticity.ufl` and :download:`CMakeLists.txt`.


Implementation
--------------

The implementation is split in two files: a form file containing the
definition of the variational forms expressed in UFL and a C++ file
containing the actual solver.

Running this demo requires the files: :download:`main.cpp`,
:download:`Hyperelasticity.ufl` and :download:`CMakeLists.txt`.

UFL form file
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The UFL file is implemented in :download:`Hyperelasticity.ufl`, and
the explanation of the UFL file can be found at :doc:`here
<Hyperelasticity.ufl>`.


C++ program
^^^^^^^^^^^

The main solver is implemented in the :download:`main.cpp` file.

At the top, we include the DOLFIN header file and the generated header
file "HyperElasticity.h" containing the variational forms and function
spaces.  For convenience we also include the DOLFIN namespace.

.. code-block:: cpp

   #include <dolfin.h>
   #include "HyperElasticity.h"

   using namespace dolfin;

We begin by defining two classes, deriving from :cpp:class:`SubDomain`
for later use when specifying domains for the boundary conditions.

.. code-block:: cpp

   // Sub domain for clamp at left end
   class Left : public SubDomain
   {
     bool inside(const Array<double>& x, bool on_boundary) const
     {
       return (std::abs(x[0]) < DOLFIN_EPS) && on_boundary;
     }
   };

   // Sub domain for rotation at right end
   class Right : public SubDomain
   {
     bool inside(const Array<double>& x, bool on_boundary) const
     {
       return (std::abs(x[0] - 1.0) < DOLFIN_EPS) && on_boundary;
     }
   };

We also define two classes, deriving from :cpp:class:`Expression`, for
later use when specifying values for the boundary conditions.

.. code-block:: cpp

   // Dirichlet boundary condition for clamp at left end
   class Clamp : public Expression
   {
   public:

     Clamp() : Expression(3) {}

     void eval(Array<double>& values, const Array<double>& x) const
     {
       values[0] = 0.0;
       values[1] = 0.0;
       values[2] = 0.0;
     }

   };

   // Dirichlet boundary condition for rotation at right end
   class Rotation : public Expression
   {
   public:

     Rotation() : Expression(3) {}

     void eval(Array<double>& values, const Array<double>& x) const
     {
       const double scale = 0.5;

       // Center of rotation
       const double y0 = 0.5;
       const double z0 = 0.5;

       // Large angle of rotation (60 degrees)
       double theta = 1.04719755;

       // New coordinates
       double y = y0 + (x[1] - y0)*cos(theta) - (x[2] - z0)*sin(theta);
       double z = z0 + (x[1] - y0)*sin(theta) + (x[2] - z0)*cos(theta);

       // Rotate at right end
       values[0] = 0.0;
       values[1] = scale*(y - x[1]);
       values[2] = scale*(z - x[2]);
     }
   };

Next:

.. code-block:: cpp

   int main()
   {

Inside the ``main`` function, we begin by defining a tetrahedral mesh
of the domain and the function space on this mesh. Here, we choose to
create a unit cube mesh with 25 ( = 24 + 1) verices in one direction
and 17 ( = 16 + 1) vertices in the other two directions. With this
mesh, we initialize the (finite element) function space defined by the
generated code.

.. code-block:: cpp

     // Create mesh and define function space
     auto mesh = std::make_shared<UnitCubeMesh>(24, 16, 16);
     auto V = std::make_shared<HyperElasticity::FunctionSpace>(mesh);

Now, the Dirichlet boundary conditions can be created using the class
:cpp:class:`DirichletBC`, the previously initialized
:cpp:class:`FunctionSpace` ``V`` and instances of the previously
listed classes ``Left`` (for the left boundary) and ``Right`` (for the
right boundary), and ``Clamp`` (for the value on the left boundary)
and ``Rotation`` (for the value on the right boundary).

.. code-block:: cpp

     // Define Dirichlet boundaries
     auto left = std::make_shared<Left>();
     auto right = std::make_shared<Right>();

     // Define Dirichlet boundary functions
     auto c = std::make_shared<Clamp>();
     auto r = std::make_shared<Rotation>();

     // Create Dirichlet boundary conditions
     DirichletBC bcl(V, c, left);
     DirichletBC bcr(V, r, right);
     std::vector<const DirichletBC*> bcs = {{&bcl, &bcr}};

The two boundary conditions are collected in the container ``bcs``.

We use two instances of the class :cpp:class:`Constant` to define the
source ``B`` and the traction ``T``.

.. code-block:: cpp

     // Define source and boundary traction functions
     auto B = std::make_shared<Constant>(0.0, -0.5, 0.0);
     auto T = std::make_shared<Constant>(0.1,  0.0, 0.0);

The solution for the displacement will be an instance of the class
:cpp:class:`Function`, living in the function space ``V``; we define
it here:

.. code-block:: cpp

     // Define solution function
     auto u = std::make_shared<Function>(V);

Next, we set the material parameters

.. code-block:: cpp

     // Set material parameters
     const double E  = 10.0;
     const double nu = 0.3;
     auto mu = std::make_shared<Constant>(E/(2*(1 + nu)));
     auto lambda = std::make_shared<Constant>(E*nu/((1 + nu)*(1 - 2*nu)));

Now, we can initialize the bilinear and linear forms (``a``, ``L``)
using the previously defined :cpp:class:`FunctionSpace` ``V``. We
attach the material parameters and previously initialized functions to
the forms.

.. code-block:: cpp

     // Create (linear) form defining (nonlinear) variational problem
     HyperElasticity::ResidualForm F(V);
     F.mu = mu; F.lmbda = lambda; F.u = u;
     F.B = B; F.T = T;

    // Create jacobian dF = F' (for use in nonlinear solver).
    HyperElasticity::JacobianForm J(V, V);
    J.mu = mu; J.lmbda = lambda; J.u = u;

Now, we have specified the variational forms and can consider the
solution of the variational problem.

.. code-block:: cpp

     // Solve nonlinear variational problem F(u; v) = 0
     solve(F == 0, *u, bcs, J);

Finally, the solution ``u`` is saved to a file named
``displacement.pvd`` in VTK format, and the displacement solution is
plotted.

.. code-block:: cpp

     // Save solution in VTK format
     File file("displacement.pvd");
     file << *u;

     // Plot solution
     plot(*u);
     interactive();

     return 0;
   }

Commit message:

Some version tracking clean-up.

demo/documented/hyperelasticity/cpp/main.cpp.rst, after:

Hyperelasticity (C++)
=====================

The implementation is split in two files: a form file containing the
definition of the variational forms expressed in UFL and the solver
which is implemented in a C++ file.

Running this demo requires the files: :download:`main.cpp`,
:download:`HyperElasticity.ufl` and :download:`CMakeLists.txt`.


Background
----------

See the section :ref:`hyperelasticity` for some mathematical
background on this demo.


Implementation
--------------

The implementation is split in two files: a form file containing the
definition of the variational forms expressed in UFL and a C++ file
containing the actual solver.

Running this demo requires the files: :download:`main.cpp`,
:download:`Hyperelasticity.ufl` and :download:`CMakeLists.txt`.

UFL form file
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The UFL file is implemented in :download:`Hyperelasticity.ufl`, and
the explanation of the UFL file can be found at :doc:`here
<Hyperelasticity.ufl>`.


C++ program
^^^^^^^^^^^

The main solver is implemented in the :download:`main.cpp` file.

At the top, we include the DOLFIN header file and the generated header
file "HyperElasticity.h" containing the variational forms and function
spaces.  For convenience we also include the DOLFIN namespace.

.. code-block:: cpp

   #include <dolfin.h>
   #include "HyperElasticity.h"

   using namespace dolfin;

We begin by defining two classes, deriving from :cpp:class:`SubDomain`
for later use when specifying domains for the boundary conditions.

.. code-block:: cpp

   // Sub domain for clamp at left end
   class Left : public SubDomain
   {
     bool inside(const Array<double>& x, bool on_boundary) const
     {
       return (std::abs(x[0]) < DOLFIN_EPS) && on_boundary;
     }
   };

   // Sub domain for rotation at right end
   class Right : public SubDomain
   {
     bool inside(const Array<double>& x, bool on_boundary) const
     {
       return (std::abs(x[0] - 1.0) < DOLFIN_EPS) && on_boundary;
     }
   };

We also define two classes, deriving from :cpp:class:`Expression`, for
later use when specifying values for the boundary conditions.

.. code-block:: cpp

   // Dirichlet boundary condition for clamp at left end
   class Clamp : public Expression
   {
   public:

     Clamp() : Expression(3) {}

     void eval(Array<double>& values, const Array<double>& x) const
     {
       values[0] = 0.0;
       values[1] = 0.0;
       values[2] = 0.0;
     }

   };

   // Dirichlet boundary condition for rotation at right end
   class Rotation : public Expression
   {
   public:

     Rotation() : Expression(3) {}

     void eval(Array<double>& values, const Array<double>& x) const
     {
       const double scale = 0.5;

       // Center of rotation
       const double y0 = 0.5;
       const double z0 = 0.5;

       // Large angle of rotation (60 degrees)
       double theta = 1.04719755;

       // New coordinates
       double y = y0 + (x[1] - y0)*cos(theta) - (x[2] - z0)*sin(theta);
       double z = z0 + (x[1] - y0)*sin(theta) + (x[2] - z0)*cos(theta);

       // Rotate at right end
       values[0] = 0.0;
       values[1] = scale*(y - x[1]);
       values[2] = scale*(z - x[2]);
     }
   };

Next:

.. code-block:: cpp

   int main()
   {

Inside the ``main`` function, we begin by defining a tetrahedral mesh
of the domain and the function space on this mesh. Here, we choose to
create a unit cube mesh with 25 ( = 24 + 1) verices in one direction
and 17 ( = 16 + 1) vertices in the other two directions. With this
mesh, we initialize the (finite element) function space defined by the
generated code.

.. code-block:: cpp

     // Create mesh and define function space
     auto mesh = std::make_shared<UnitCubeMesh>(24, 16, 16);
     auto V = std::make_shared<HyperElasticity::FunctionSpace>(mesh);

Now, the Dirichlet boundary conditions can be created using the class
:cpp:class:`DirichletBC`, the previously initialized
:cpp:class:`FunctionSpace` ``V`` and instances of the previously
listed classes ``Left`` (for the left boundary) and ``Right`` (for the
right boundary), and ``Clamp`` (for the value on the left boundary)
and ``Rotation`` (for the value on the right boundary).

.. code-block:: cpp

     // Define Dirichlet boundaries
     auto left = std::make_shared<Left>();
     auto right = std::make_shared<Right>();

     // Define Dirichlet boundary functions
     auto c = std::make_shared<Clamp>();
     auto r = std::make_shared<Rotation>();

     // Create Dirichlet boundary conditions
     DirichletBC bcl(V, c, left);
     DirichletBC bcr(V, r, right);
     std::vector<const DirichletBC*> bcs = {{&bcl, &bcr}};

The two boundary conditions are collected in the container ``bcs``.

We use two instances of the class :cpp:class:`Constant` to define the
source ``B`` and the traction ``T``.

.. code-block:: cpp

     // Define source and boundary traction functions
     auto B = std::make_shared<Constant>(0.0, -0.5, 0.0);
     auto T = std::make_shared<Constant>(0.1,  0.0, 0.0);

The solution for the displacement will be an instance of the class
:cpp:class:`Function`, living in the function space ``V``; we define
it here:

.. code-block:: cpp

     // Define solution function
     auto u = std::make_shared<Function>(V);

Next, we set the material parameters

.. code-block:: cpp

     // Set material parameters
     const double E  = 10.0;
     const double nu = 0.3;
     auto mu = std::make_shared<Constant>(E/(2*(1 + nu)));
     auto lambda = std::make_shared<Constant>(E*nu/((1 + nu)*(1 - 2*nu)));

Now, we can initialize the bilinear and linear forms (``a``, ``L``)
using the previously defined :cpp:class:`FunctionSpace` ``V``. We
attach the material parameters and previously initialized functions to
the forms.

.. code-block:: cpp

     // Create (linear) form defining (nonlinear) variational problem
     HyperElasticity::ResidualForm F(V);
     F.mu = mu; F.lmbda = lambda; F.u = u;
     F.B = B; F.T = T;

    // Create jacobian dF = F' (for use in nonlinear solver).
    HyperElasticity::JacobianForm J(V, V);
    J.mu = mu; J.lmbda = lambda; J.u = u;

Now, we have specified the variational forms and can consider the
solution of the variational problem.

.. code-block:: cpp

     // Solve nonlinear variational problem F(u; v) = 0
     solve(F == 0, *u, bcs, J);

Finally, the solution ``u`` is saved to a file named
``displacement.pvd`` in VTK format, and the displacement solution is
plotted.

.. code-block:: cpp

     // Save solution in VTK format
     File file("displacement.pvd");
     file << *u;

     // Plot solution
     plot(*u);
     interactive();

     return 0;
   }
