.. Documentation for subdomains demo from DOLFIN.

.. _demo_pde_subdomains_python_documentation:

Marking subdomains of a mesh
============================

This demo is implemented in a single Python file,
:download:`demo_subdomains.py`.


# .. include:: ../common.txt

Implementation
--------------

First, the :py:mod:`dolfin` module is imported:

.. code-block:: python

    from dolfin import *

It may be useful to get information about what is going on behind the
scenes when the program is running. In DOLFIN, we can control which
messages routed through the logging system will be printed. By
calling the function :py:class:`set_log_level()
<dolfin.cpp.common.set_log_level>` we specify the log level. An
optional integer argument may be given to specify the level, the
default level is 20. Only messages on a level higher than or equal to
the current log level will be printed. To get as much information as
possible we will set the log level to 1:

.. code-block:: python

    set_log_level(1)

Before we can mark the boundaries, we must specify the boundary
conditions.  We do this by defining three classes, one for each
boundary condition. We start by defining the whole boundary as a
noslip boundary, and then overwrite the parts of the boundary that is
inflow and outflow.

.. code-block:: python

    # Sub domain for no-slip (mark whole boundary, inflow and outflow will overwrite)
    class Noslip(SubDomain):
        def inside(self, x, on_boundary):
            return on_boundary

    # Sub domain for inflow (right)
    class Inflow(SubDomain):
        def inside(self, x, on_boundary):
            return x[0] > 1.0 - DOLFIN_EPS and on_boundary

    # Sub domain for outflow (left)
    class Outflow(SubDomain):
        def inside(self, x, on_boundary):
            return x[0] < DOLFIN_EPS and on_boundary

Then, we import the mesh:

.. code-block:: python

    # Read mesh
    mesh = Mesh("../dolfin_fine.xml.gz")

We create a :py:class:`MeshFunction <dolfin.cpp.MeshFunction>` to
store the numbering of the subdomains.  When creating a MeshFunction
an argument specifying the type of the MeshFunction must be given.
Allowed types are ‘int’, ‘size_t’, ‘double’ and ‘bool’. To illustrate
the difference of these we will use both ‘size_t’, ‘double’ and
‘bool’:

.. code-block:: python

    # Create mesh functions over the cell facets
    sub_domains = MeshFunction("size_t", mesh, mesh.topology().dim() - 1)
    sub_domains_bool = MeshFunction("bool", mesh, mesh.topology().dim() - 1)
    sub_domains_double = MeshFunction("double", mesh, mesh.topology().dim() - 1)

The second and third arguments are optional. The second argument
specifies our mesh, while the third argument gives the topological
dimension of the :py:class:`MeshFunction <dolfin.cpp.MeshFunction>`,
which is the topological dimension of our mesh minus 1.

We are now ready to mark the mesh. We will create four subdomains of
the mesh; one subdomain for each boundary condition and a fourth
subdomain for the interior. First, we mark all facets in the mesh as
part of subdomain 3. Since we want to illustrate the possible types
of mesh functions, this is done in three different ways. The first
type, the :py:class:`MeshFunction <dolfin.cpp.MeshFunctionSizet>`,
takes an integer argument and all facets will be given this index.
The second type, the :py:class:`MeshFunction
<dolfin.cpp.MeshFunctionBool>`, takes a boolean as argument and all
facets will be marked by this boolean.  The third type , the
:py:class:`MeshFunction <dolfin.cpp.MeshFunctionDouble>`, takes a
floating point number as argument and this number will be the index of
all the facets.

.. code-block:: python

    # Mark all facets as sub domain 3
    sub_domains.set_all(3)
    sub_domains_bool.set_all(False)
    sub_domains_double.set_all(0.3)

When all facets are marked, we mark only the boundary facets.  We give
the noslip boundary the index 0.  To mark the facets of the noslip
boundary, we first make an instance of the class ``Noslip``, and then
mark these facets with the correct value (either an integer, boolean
or double).

.. code-block:: python

    # Mark no-slip facets as sub domain 0, 0.0
    noslip = Noslip()
    noslip.mark(sub_domains, 0)
    noslip.mark(sub_domains_double, 0.0)

The same must be done for the inflow and outflow boundaries.  The
inflow is marked as subdomain 1 and the outflow is marked as subdomain
2:

.. code-block:: python

    # Mark inflow as sub domain 1, 01
    inflow = Inflow()
    inflow.mark(sub_domains, 1)
    inflow.mark(sub_domains_double, 0.1)

    # Mark outflow as sub domain 2, 0.2, True
    outflow = Outflow()
    outflow.mark(sub_domains, 2)
    outflow.mark(sub_domains_double, 0.2)
    outflow.mark(sub_domains_bool, True)

Finally, to be able to use these subdomains together with the mesh in
other programs, we save the subdomains to file, both as XML and VTK
files:

.. code-block:: python

    # Save sub domains to file
    file = File("subdomains.xml")
    file << sub_domains

    # FIXME: Not implemented
    #file_bool = File("subdomains_bool.xml")
    #file_bool << sub_domains_bool

    file_double = File("subdomains_double.xml")
    file_double << sub_domains_double

    # Save sub domains to VTK files
    file = File("subdomains.pvd")
    file << sub_domains

    file = File("subdomains_double.pvd")
    file << sub_domains_double

Complete code
-------------

.. literalinclude:: demo_subdomains.py
   :start-after: # Begin demo
