demo/documented/hyperelasticity/python/demo_hyperelasticity.py.rst, before:


.. _demo_hyperelasticity:

Hyperelasticity
===============

This demo is implemented in a single Python file,
:download:`demo_hyperelasticity.py`, which contains both the
variational forms and the solver.

Implementation
--------------

This demo is implemented in the :download:`demo_hyperelasticity.py`
file.

First, the :py:mod:`dolfin` module is imported::

    from dolfin import *

The behavior of the form compiler FFC can be adjusted by prescribing
various parameters. Here, we want to use the UFLACS backend of FFC::

    # Optimization options for the form compiler
    parameters["form_compiler"]["cpp_optimize"] = True
    parameters["form_compiler"]["representation"] = "uflacs"

The first line tells the form compiler to use C++ compiler optimizations when
compiling the generated code. The remainder is a dictionary of options which
will be passed to the form compiler. It lists the optimizations strategies
that we wish the form compiler to use when generating code.

.. index:: VectorFunctionSpace

First, we need a tetrahedral mesh of the domain and a function space
on this mesh. Here, we choose to create a unit cube mesh with 25 ( =
24 + 1) vertices in one direction and 17 ( = 16 + 1) vertices in the
other two direction. On this mesh, we define a function space of
continuous piecewise linear vector polynomials (a Lagrange vector
element space)::

    # Create mesh and define function space
    mesh = UnitCubeMesh(24, 16, 16)
    V = VectorFunctionSpace(mesh, "Lagrange", 1)

Note that :py:class:`VectorFunctionSpace
<dolfin.functions.functionspace.VectorFunctionSpace>` creates a
function space of vector fields. The dimension of the vector field
(the number of components) is assumed to be the same as the spatial
dimension, unless otherwise specified.

.. index:: compiled subdomain

The portions of the boundary on which Dirichlet boundary conditions
will be applied are now defined::

    # Mark boundary subdomians
    left =  CompiledSubDomain("near(x[0], side) && on_boundary", side = 0.0)
    right = CompiledSubDomain("near(x[0], side) && on_boundary", side = 1.0)

The boundary subdomain ``left`` corresponds to the part of the
boundary on which :math:`x=0` and the boundary subdomain ``right``
corresponds to the part of the boundary on which :math:`x=1`. Note
that C++ syntax is used in the :py:func:`CompiledSubDomain`
<dolfin.compilemodules.subdomains.CompiledSubDomain>` function since
the function will be automatically compiled into C++ code for
efficiency. The (built-in) variable ``on_boundary`` is true for points
on the boundary of a domain, and false otherwise.

.. index:: compiled expression

The Dirichlet boundary values are defined using compiled expressions::

    # Define Dirichlet boundary (x = 0 or x = 1)
    c = Constant((0.0, 0.0, 0.0))
    r = Expression(("scale*0.0",
                    "scale*(y0 + (x[1] - y0)*cos(theta) - (x[2] - z0)*sin(theta) - x[1])",
                    "scale*(z0 + (x[1] - y0)*sin(theta) + (x[2] - z0)*cos(theta) - x[2])"),
                    scale = 0.5, y0 = 0.5, z0 = 0.5, theta = pi/3, degree=2)

Note the use of setting named parameters in the :py:class:`Expression
<dolfin.functions.expression.Expression>` for ``r``.

The boundary subdomains and the boundary condition expressions are
collected together in two :py:class:`DirichletBC
<dolfin.fem.bcs.DirichletBC>` objects, one for each part of the
Dirichlet boundary::

    bcl = DirichletBC(V, c, left)
    bcr = DirichletBC(V, r, right)
    bcs = [bcl, bcr]

The Dirichlet (essential) boundary conditions are constraints on the
function space :math:`V`. The function space is therefore required as
an argument to :py:class:`DirichletBC <dolfin.fem.bcs.DirichletBC>`.

.. index:: TestFunction, TrialFunction, Constant

Trial and test functions, and the most recent approximate displacement
``u`` are defined on the finite element space ``V``, and two objects
of type :py:class:`Constant <dolfin.functions.constant.Constant>` are
declared for the body force (``B``) and traction (``T``) terms::

    # Define functions
    du = TrialFunction(V)            # Incremental displacement
    v  = TestFunction(V)             # Test function
    u  = Function(V)                 # Displacement from previous iteration
    B  = Constant((0.0, -0.5, 0.0))  # Body force per unit volume
    T  = Constant((0.1,  0.0, 0.0))  # Traction force on the boundary

In place of :py:class:`Constant <dolfin.functions.constant.Constant>`,
it is also possible to use ``as_vector``, e.g.  ``B = as_vector( [0.0,
-0.5, 0.0] )``. The advantage of Constant is that its values can be
changed without requiring re-generation and re-compilation of C++
code. On the other hand, using ``as_vector`` can eliminate some
function calls during assembly.

With the functions defined, the kinematic quantities involved in the model
are defined using UFL syntax::

    # Kinematics
    d = len(u)
    I = Identity(d)             # Identity tensor
    F = I + grad(u)             # Deformation gradient
    C = F.T*F                   # Right Cauchy-Green tensor

    # Invariants of deformation tensors
    Ic = tr(C)
    J  = det(F)

Next, the material parameters are set and the strain energy density
and the total potential energy are defined, again using UFL syntax::

    # Elasticity parameters
    E, nu = 10.0, 0.3
    mu, lmbda = Constant(E/(2*(1 + nu))), Constant(E*nu/((1 + nu)*(1 - 2*nu)))

    # Stored strain energy density (compressible neo-Hookean model)
    psi = (mu/2)*(Ic - 3) - mu*ln(J) + (lmbda/2)*(ln(J))**2

    # Total potential energy
    Pi = psi*dx - dot(B, u)*dx - dot(T, u)*ds

Just as for the body force and traction vectors, :py:class:`Constant
<dolfin.functions.constant.Constant>` has been used for the model
parameters ``mu`` and ``lmbda`` to avoid re-generation of C++ code
when changing model parameters. Note that ``lambda`` is a reserved
keyword in Python, hence the misspelling ``lmbda``.

.. index:: directional derivative; derivative, taking variations; derivative, automatic differentiation; derivative

Directional derivatives are now computed of :math:`\Pi` and :math:`L`
(see :eq:`first_variation` and :eq:`second_variation`)::

    # Compute first variation of Pi (directional derivative about u in the direction of v)
    F = derivative(Pi, u, v)

    # Compute Jacobian of F
    J = derivative(F, u, du)

The complete variational problem can now be solved by a single call to
:py:func:`solve <dolfin.fem.solving.solve>`::

    # Solve variational problem
    solve(F == 0, u, bcs, J=J)

Finally, the solution ``u`` is saved to a file named
``displacement.pvd`` in VTK format, and the deformed mesh is plotted
to the screen::

    # Save solution in VTK format
    file = File("displacement.pvd");
    file << u;

    # Plot and hold solution
    plot(u, mode = "displacement", interactive = True)

Commit message:

Copy background material files into demo system (tested for hyperelasticity).

demo/documented/hyperelasticity/python/demo_hyperelasticity.py.rst, after:


.. _demo_hyperelasticity:

Hyperelasticity
===============

This demo is implemented in a single Python file,
:download:`demo_hyperelasticity.py`, which contains both the
variational forms and the solver.


Background
----------

See the section :ref:`hyperelasticity` for some mathematical
background on this demo.


Implementation
--------------

This demo is implemented in the :download:`demo_hyperelasticity.py`
file.

First, the :py:mod:`dolfin` module is imported::

    from dolfin import *

The behavior of the form compiler FFC can be adjusted by prescribing
various parameters. Here, we want to use the UFLACS backend of FFC::

    # Optimization options for the form compiler
    parameters["form_compiler"]["cpp_optimize"] = True
    parameters["form_compiler"]["representation"] = "uflacs"

The first line tells the form compiler to use C++ compiler optimizations when
compiling the generated code. The remainder is a dictionary of options which
will be passed to the form compiler. It lists the optimizations strategies
that we wish the form compiler to use when generating code.

.. index:: VectorFunctionSpace

First, we need a tetrahedral mesh of the domain and a function space
on this mesh. Here, we choose to create a unit cube mesh with 25 ( =
24 + 1) vertices in one direction and 17 ( = 16 + 1) vertices in the
other two direction. On this mesh, we define a function space of
continuous piecewise linear vector polynomials (a Lagrange vector
element space)::

    # Create mesh and define function space
    mesh = UnitCubeMesh(24, 16, 16)
    V = VectorFunctionSpace(mesh, "Lagrange", 1)

Note that :py:class:`VectorFunctionSpace
<dolfin.functions.functionspace.VectorFunctionSpace>` creates a
function space of vector fields. The dimension of the vector field
(the number of components) is assumed to be the same as the spatial
dimension, unless otherwise specified.

.. index:: compiled subdomain

The portions of the boundary on which Dirichlet boundary conditions
will be applied are now defined::

    # Mark boundary subdomians
    left =  CompiledSubDomain("near(x[0], side) && on_boundary", side = 0.0)
    right = CompiledSubDomain("near(x[0], side) && on_boundary", side = 1.0)

The boundary subdomain ``left`` corresponds to the part of the
boundary on which :math:`x=0` and the boundary subdomain ``right``
corresponds to the part of the boundary on which :math:`x=1`. Note
that C++ syntax is used in the :py:func:`CompiledSubDomain`
<dolfin.compilemodules.subdomains.CompiledSubDomain>` function since
the function will be automatically compiled into C++ code for
efficiency. The (built-in) variable ``on_boundary`` is true for points
on the boundary of a domain, and false otherwise.

.. index:: compiled expression

The Dirichlet boundary values are defined using compiled expressions::

    # Define Dirichlet boundary (x = 0 or x = 1)
    c = Constant((0.0, 0.0, 0.0))
    r = Expression(("scale*0.0",
                    "scale*(y0 + (x[1] - y0)*cos(theta) - (x[2] - z0)*sin(theta) - x[1])",
                    "scale*(z0 + (x[1] - y0)*sin(theta) + (x[2] - z0)*cos(theta) - x[2])"),
                    scale = 0.5, y0 = 0.5, z0 = 0.5, theta = pi/3, degree=2)

Note the use of setting named parameters in the :py:class:`Expression
<dolfin.functions.expression.Expression>` for ``r``.

The boundary subdomains and the boundary condition expressions are
collected together in two :py:class:`DirichletBC
<dolfin.fem.bcs.DirichletBC>` objects, one for each part of the
Dirichlet boundary::

    bcl = DirichletBC(V, c, left)
    bcr = DirichletBC(V, r, right)
    bcs = [bcl, bcr]

The Dirichlet (essential) boundary conditions are constraints on the
function space :math:`V`. The function space is therefore required as
an argument to :py:class:`DirichletBC <dolfin.fem.bcs.DirichletBC>`.

.. index:: TestFunction, TrialFunction, Constant

Trial and test functions, and the most recent approximate displacement
``u`` are defined on the finite element space ``V``, and two objects
of type :py:class:`Constant <dolfin.functions.constant.Constant>` are
declared for the body force (``B``) and traction (``T``) terms::

    # Define functions
    du = TrialFunction(V)            # Incremental displacement
    v  = TestFunction(V)             # Test function
    u  = Function(V)                 # Displacement from previous iteration
    B  = Constant((0.0, -0.5, 0.0))  # Body force per unit volume
    T  = Constant((0.1,  0.0, 0.0))  # Traction force on the boundary

In place of :py:class:`Constant <dolfin.functions.constant.Constant>`,
it is also possible to use ``as_vector``, e.g.  ``B = as_vector( [0.0,
-0.5, 0.0] )``. The advantage of Constant is that its values can be
changed without requiring re-generation and re-compilation of C++
code. On the other hand, using ``as_vector`` can eliminate some
function calls during assembly.

With the functions defined, the kinematic quantities involved in the model
are defined using UFL syntax::

    # Kinematics
    d = len(u)
    I = Identity(d)             # Identity tensor
    F = I + grad(u)             # Deformation gradient
    C = F.T*F                   # Right Cauchy-Green tensor

    # Invariants of deformation tensors
    Ic = tr(C)
    J  = det(F)

Next, the material parameters are set and the strain energy density
and the total potential energy are defined, again using UFL syntax::

    # Elasticity parameters
    E, nu = 10.0, 0.3
    mu, lmbda = Constant(E/(2*(1 + nu))), Constant(E*nu/((1 + nu)*(1 - 2*nu)))

    # Stored strain energy density (compressible neo-Hookean model)
    psi = (mu/2)*(Ic - 3) - mu*ln(J) + (lmbda/2)*(ln(J))**2

    # Total potential energy
    Pi = psi*dx - dot(B, u)*dx - dot(T, u)*ds

Just as for the body force and traction vectors, :py:class:`Constant
<dolfin.functions.constant.Constant>` has been used for the model
parameters ``mu`` and ``lmbda`` to avoid re-generation of C++ code
when changing model parameters. Note that ``lambda`` is a reserved
keyword in Python, hence the misspelling ``lmbda``.

.. index:: directional derivative; derivative, taking variations; derivative, automatic differentiation; derivative

Directional derivatives are now computed of :math:`\Pi` and :math:`L`
(see :eq:`first_variation` and :eq:`second_variation`)::

    # Compute first variation of Pi (directional derivative about u in the direction of v)
    F = derivative(Pi, u, v)

    # Compute Jacobian of F
    J = derivative(F, u, du)

The complete variational problem can now be solved by a single call to
:py:func:`solve <dolfin.fem.solving.solve>`::

    # Solve variational problem
    solve(F == 0, u, bcs, J=J)

Finally, the solution ``u`` is saved to a file named
``displacement.pvd`` in VTK format, and the deformed mesh is plotted
to the screen::

    # Save solution in VTK format
    file = File("displacement.pvd");
    file << u;

    # Plot and hold solution
    plot(u, mode = "displacement", interactive = True)
